Nineteen strains from the orderLactobacillaleswere isolated from the International Space Station and commercial resupply vehicle, and whole-genome sequences (WGS) were generated. WGS would permit the characterization of these potentially pathogenic bacteria that have been adapting to the extreme conditions of the space environment.
ABSTRACT
Nineteen strains from the orderLactobacillaleswere isolated from the International Space Station and commercial resupply vehicle, and whole-genome sequences (WGS) were generated. WGS would permit the characterization of these potentially pathogenic bacteria that have been adapting to the extreme conditions of the space environment.
ANNOUNCEMENT
The orderLactobacillalesconsists of Gram stain-positive, facultative anaerobes validly described by Ludwig et al. (1). Members of the genusEnterococcusare found to possess human pathogenicity characteristics such as antibiotic resistance (2) and therefore pose health concerns for those on Earth and astronauts residing in the International Space Station (ISS). However,Aerococcus urinaeequi, a nonpathogenic strain, was first isolated from horse urine (3). Astronauts on long flights are immunocompromised due to microgravity-induced physiological and mental stress. Decreased immune response allows bacteria to take growth advantage due to their adaptability potential in the space environment (4). Understanding the genomic makeup of these potential pathogens will help the development of suitable countermeasure and mitigation strategies. Members of the orderLactobacillalesisolated from the ISS and the commercial resupply vehicle (CRV) surfaces wereEnterococcus faecalis,Enterococcus faecium, andAerococcus urinaeequi(5,6).E. faecalisandE. faeciumhave been reported as nosocomial isolates harboring vancomycin and ampicillin resistance (5).A. urinaeequiwas isolated from a chronic kidney disease patient and has also been reported to be resistant to vancomycin (6). Further characterization of the whole-genome sequences (WGS) of these ISS environmental strains, including virulence genes, and subsequent confirmation in animal models are required to decipher their potential pathogenicity.
The strains used for the WGS were collected from three different ISS locations across two flights and seven different surface locations, including one field control on CRV6, and are detailed inTable 1(7). The samples collected from the ISS were brought back to Earth and aseptically processed, and suitable aliquots of the sample concentrate (100 μl) were plated onto Reasoner’s 2A (R2A) or Trypticase soy agar (TSA) medium and incubated at 25°C for 7 days. A single well-isolated colony on a culture plate was archived at −80°C. Genomic DNA was extracted from the overnight-grown cultures on TSA medium using a ZymoBIOMICS DNA MagBead kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
TABLE 1.
Metadata and genome statistics ofAerococcusandEnterococcusstrains isolated from various ISS and CRV6 environmental surfaces during the Microbial Tracking-1 Flight Projecta
Sample name, ANI (%)b, GenBank accession no., Raw sequence accession no., Flight no./locationc, Location description, No. of contigs, Genome size (bp), N50(bp), Median sequencing depth (×), No. of QC reads, No. of raw reads, G+C content (%)
table00001
Abbreviations: ANI, average nucleotide identity; F1, ISS flight 1; F2, ISS flight 2; WHC, waste and hygiene compartment; FC, field control (a sampling wipe was exposed to the air for 120 s at the center of CRV6); QC, quality control.
The 16S rRNA gene sequences were retrieved from the WGS, and BLAST analysis was conducted against type strains of all 16S rRNA sequences in the NCBI database. The bacterial species identity was determined when the queried sequence showed >97.5% similarity with the 16S rRNA gene sequences of the type strain. The WGS of the nearest neighbor was further selected for ANI evaluation: A,A. urinaeequiDSM 20341T; B,E. faecalisDSM 20478T; C,E. faeciumDSM 20477T.
Hyphenated designations indicate the flight number followed by the location; for example, F1-1 indicates flight 1 and location 1.
The WGS of 19 bacterial isolates were prepared using the Illumina Nextera Flex protocol for library preparation, as used in similar studies (8). The NovaSeq 6000 S4 flow cell paired-end 2 × 150-bp platform was used to execute paired-end sequencing. FastQC v0.11.7 was used to validate the quality of the raw sequencing data (9). Adapter trimming and quality filtering were carried out using the software fastp v0.20.0 to perform quality control (10). The cleaned sequences were assembled using SPAdes v3.11.1 (11). TheN50values, numbers of contigs, and total genome lengths were generated using QUAST v5.0.2 and used to assess the quality of the final assembly (12). The average nucleotide identity was calculated by comparing all strains with their respective type strains, and their taxonomic affiliations, as well as genome statistics, are given inTable 1(13). The NCBI Prokaryotic Genome Annotation Pipeline v4.12 was used for genome annotation. Default parameters were used for all software.
Data availability.
This WGS project has been deposited at DDBJ/ENA/GenBank, and the accession numbers are given inTable 1(BioProject accession no.PRJNA645454with 16 strains andPRJNA649272with 3 strains). The versions described in this paper are the first versions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Part of the research described in this publication was carried out at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under a contract with NASA. We thank astronauts Captain Terry Virts for collecting samples aboard the ISS and the implementation team at NASA Ames Research Center for coordinating this effort. We thank Ryan Kemp (Zymo Corporation) for extracting DNA and Dan Butler (Cornell Medicine) for generating shotgun sequencing using NovaSeq.
Government sponsorship is acknowledged. This research was funded by a 2012 Space Biology NNH12ZTT001N grant (no. 19-12829-26) under task order NNN13D111T awarded to K.V., which also funded a postdoctoral fellowship for J.M.W., and a subcontract to Biotia, Inc.
REFERENCES
Associated Data
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
Data Availability Statement
This WGS project has been deposited at DDBJ/ENA/GenBank, and the accession numbers are given inTable 1(BioProject accession no.PRJNA645454with 16 strains andPRJNA649272with 3 strains). The versions described in this paper are the first versions.
Articles from Microbiology Resource Announcements are provided here courtesy ofAmerican Society for Microbiology (ASM)